KEP 4568: Resilient watchcache initialization (#4557)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-api-machinery/xxx-resilient-watchcache-initialization/README.md

LIMIT parameter is honored, so for large collections we end-up paging the
response (which for large collections and limit=500 of reflector/informer
frameworks can result in hundreds of consecutive requests for next pages).

The second case is suffering from the same problem as watches, as those requests
may effectively starve the whole PriorityLevel.

In order to mitigate the above problem, we propose a couple different changes.

[the documentation]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/api-concepts/#semantics-for-get-and-list

#### Reduce the number of requests during initialization

As a first step, we will try to reduce the number of requests that are even reaching
kube-apiserver with unitialized watchcache. To achieve it, we will introduce a new
PostStartHook that will wait for watchcache of all *builtin* resources to be initialized.

Why this should help with reducing the number of requests? The whole idea behind
kube-apiserver readiness is that Kubernetes installations should be configured so that
requests are not sent to it until kube-apiserver becomes ready. The above will allow us
to delay this moment until watchcache is initialized.

> Why PostStartHook instead of /readyz check? Watchcache is per-type layer and we want

Reviewer: Yes, I realize that, I was (in a roundabout way) agreeing with your reasoning here.

to avoid marking whole kube-apiserver as not-ready if watchcache for one of resources

> requires reinitialization. We will handle those cases differently.

Reviewer 2: Just making sure I understand.  Would the first initialization of each builtin type be /readyz gated but any re-initialization be post- /readyz (but still result in 429 responses)?

Author: The way poststarthook works is just it effectively:
1) is starteded once:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/server/hooks.go#L194-L206
2) it's reported as healthy as soon as it succeeds for the first time:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/server/hooks.go#L238-L245
[and it never changes back to false later]

So what will happen is effectively:
- first initialization of each builtin type will prevent readyz from succeeding [initialization of kube-apiserver]
- even if watchcache needs to reinitialize later, it will not bring readyz/ back to failing, but as you wrote, requests [which exactly described below] will be returning 429

tried to clarify in the text

Finally, we suggest starting just with builtin resources, as CRDs can be created at
any time, making it harder to implement with unclear gain. If it appears to not be

> enough, this decision can easily be revisited in the future.

Author: No - that seems easy to adjust later too. Added to the text.

#### Reject hanging watches

To mitigate the problem of starving certain PriorityLevels, instead of having the
watch hang and wait for watchcache initialization, we will simply reject it with
`Too Many Requests` 429 http code.
The reason for using this code is that it's already [properly handled] by our client
libraries (e.g. reflector) and will not risk all of them suddenly falling back
to list requests. Moreover, given that 429 is a long supported http code, we expect
that other clients should also properly support it.

[properly handled]: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/41e706600aea7468f486150d951d3b8948ce89d5/staging/src/k8s.io/client-go/tools/cache/reflector.go#L910-L920

#### Delegate get requests to etcd

Since GET requests have bounded cost, we always estimate their weight the same
no matter if they are served from etcd or from cache (the latency would be
different in those cases though, so the actual seat-seconds cost too) and
finally given we already did some work to process this request, we would

> simply delegate those requests to etcd.

Reviewer 2: I really like how this KEP, combined with _list-watch_ and _consistent reads from cache_ all seem to move the system in a direction where the actual cost of GET requests will have less expected variation than they do today.

#### Adjust what lists are delegated to etcd

It's tempting to reject all list requests with 429 the same way as watches.
However, that would also have a negative consequences, e.g. by slowing down
kube-apiserver initialization (kube-apiserver on startup need to initialize
its own informers by loop-client, and by rejecting all lists until watchcache

> is initialized, we would effectively block that initialization).

Reviewer 2: List-Watch would return 429?  Do we benefit from getting list-watch enabled-by-default before enabling this enhancement by default?

Author: Yes - ListWatch is effectively a regular Watch call underneathy (with some specific params, but handled by Watch()) methods. So yes - it will also return 429.

I don't think enabling list-watch first effectively gives us anything. Given that we want the behavior to be the same for watches and lists, the switch to list-watch should be no-op from that perspective.

> While we don't may decide to adjust the approach here, we will start with
> the approach that we will delegate to etcd the requests that (a) are not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While we didn't decide to reject _all_ list requests with 429 here, we will start with
an approach where we only delegate to etcd the requests that (a) are not
```

(wording suggestion only.. please only accept if this matches what was intended)

Author: it matches - thanks for clarifying

> setting any selectors (b) are setting a limit.

Author: AND - added to the text

The first condition means that every object that we process will also be
returned, so we're protecting from requests very selective list requests that
are likely order(s) of magnitude more expensive when served from etcd.
The second condition effectively bounds the cost of the request.

We may decide to adjust it based on further feedback and/or experiments.

#### Reject the rest of list requests

To mitigate the problem of starving certain PriorityLevels, all other list
requests will be rejected with 429 http code similarly to watch requests.

### Risks and Mitigations

Given we're changing the existing behavior, there is a risk of breaking some
clients. To mitigate it, we will introduce all the logic behind a feature
gate, to allow for disabling them if needed.

However, given we're not changing the API itself, we propose to go directly

> to Beta, as Alpha will not give us any feedback.

Reviewer 2: cc @deads2k

I haven't put much thought into what the criteria should be for skipping alpha.  This would be on-by-default I'm assuming?

Clearly all Beta PRR criteria would need to be met.

Author: > This would be on-by-default I'm assuming?

Yes

> Clearly all Beta PRR criteria would need to be met.

of course - whole PRR still requires filling in

Regarding the main comment - for me Alpha stage makes sense for things that change API [e.g. to enable rollback]. For purely in-memory changes (like this one), alpha is no-op and noone uses it, so we effectively have zero benefit from it.

Reviewer 2: I support going straight to beta for this. I consider startup readiness something we should be able to refine w/o going through all the stability levels.

#### Adjust what lists are delegated to etcd

It's tempting to reject all list requests with 429 the same way as watches.
However, that would also have a negative consequences, e.g. by slowing down
kube-apiserver initialization (kube-apiserver on startup need to initialize
its own informers by loop-client, and by rejecting all lists until watchcache
is initialized, we would effectively block that initialization).

While we don't may decide to adjust the approach here, we will start with
the approach that we will delegate to etcd the requests that (a) are not
setting any selectors (b) are setting a limit.
The first condition means that every object that we process will also be
returned, so we're protecting from requests very selective list requests that
are likely order(s) of magnitude more expensive when served from etcd.
The second condition effectively bounds the cost of the request.

We may decide to adjust it based on further feedback and/or experiments.

#### Reject the rest of list requests

To mitigate the problem of starving certain PriorityLevels, all other list

> requests will be rejected with 429 http code similarly to watch requests.

Author: TODO: Same for Get() requests.

Author: Alternatively, we can just pass them to etcd, given we already got to this point and those are much cheaper - might be better idea.

### Risks and Mitigations

Given we're changing the existing behavior, there is a risk of breaking some
clients. To mitigate it, we will introduce all the logic behind a feature
gate, to allow for disabling them if needed.

However, given we're not changing the API itself, we propose to go directly
to Beta, as Alpha will not give us any feedback.

## Design Details

> <!--

Author: The POC: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/124029
